{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11320\viewh12140\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 David Kimball\
\
What are the worst problems in ballot design? \
What is the worst ballot you\'92ve seen? The best?\
How many people would you estimate fail to vote or vote as they intended because of bad design?\
\
What are the projects and jurisdictions trying to improve the situation?\
\
What are other design problems that crop up around elections that don\'92t have to do with ballots?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
- Forms like voter registration, vote-by-mail requests\
- Information about polling places, how to vote, accessibility options, and voter registration status\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
What\'92s changed since you wrote \'93Better Ballots\'94?\
\
\
Good news, things have gotten better, more in right direction, mor election officials who are usually responsible for layout and design are more aware of dos and don\'92ts and therefore I think we tend not to see as many really egregious than we did 10-15 years ago. \
Chisel been instrumental to produce guidebooks, that they\'92ve help promote best practices in the ballot. \
Worst problems: \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 1. areas of concern: Growth of absentee ballots and voting by mail. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 For people who vote at polling place, there are # of improvements, in most states locates, some kind of error correction feature, if you finish, you scan it, and if there are errors or overrates, the machine spits it back out,\
with absentee voting that sort of fails safe or backstop is missing, and if there are errors, too bad. \
absentee ballots, being rejected for \'93techunlca\'94 reasons, forgot to right address, other requaltremnts, maybe signing the envelope, other identifying info, that voters may not know they are supposed to do. the paperwork and envelopes instructions that go with absentee voting could be made clearer to reduce error. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 2. under special circumstances there can still be some ballot design challenges. Senate primary in CA this summer, Barbara Boxers seat, record # of candidates, 20-30 candidates running on the ballot, you simply 
\b0 can\'92t, ideally all candidates fit in 1 column on 1 page, that is the best layout to avoid confusing voters, but in this case you have the list in multiple columns on muktile pages and that\'92s just asking for trouble. \
don\'92t know the best strategy, its rare\
Still looking at evidence, looks like listing all candidates on 1 page and 1 column, use an 8x14 size ballot size, fit all names in 1 column. \
County by counties, each county did things different;y, looking at results, seems like the ones that listed all candidates in 1 column on 1 page lowest rate of mistakes where people voted for more than 1 candidate, can be hard to do based on who your vendor is, not all can print extra long ballots like that. \
Unique situations like that can pose a challenge even to well meaning election officials. \
\
Still some space to have weird things like state law requires capital letters or weird language on the ballot, the rend has been toward trying to simplify those things, some states changed their election laws to remove confusing features of the ballot. Over past 10 years, movement has been in the direction of simplify. \

\b Kansas \'97 state law used to required state-wide that put the home town of candidates on the ballot, why do that? just more words, might mess people up. Seemed odd to me. \
CA \'97 list the occupation of a candidate, so for the incumbent it would say \'93inbumbentd\'94 seems odd to me, it indicates the incumbent, but that maybe the only state that does that, not sure its helpful. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
LA County experience, first basically designing their own voting equipment from start to finish. If they\'92re successful that will really be interesting, example for other places. Their coming from this system of venues, based on the old punch card which I\'92m not a fan of. Whatever they come up with has got to be better. \
\
Cook County had a basically design specialist work with them, design a new ballots and new instructional materials and signs, that seemed to be pretty successful, over 10 years ago. \
\
\
Font thing lowercase, learned about it. Would have never. Political scientist, had no design backroung indicating it. \
\
Voting side of things, to absentee ballots and provisional ballots, at least in big elections now, there are fewer voting errors on the polling place ballots than there are with provisional and absentee ballots, some of it is mail-in , and also they requite additional paperwork, envelope, additional steps that voters the to do, no one there to remind people to sign it.\
\
Some places are shifting towards vote centers, instead of polling place. Election office send you a postcard, based on where you liv,e this is where you vote. If you go to a diff place, not going to let you vote there. \
In the West, shifted to vote centers, fewer # of polling places but you can vote at any one. Those have to be able to support larger volume of voters, don\'92t know which one people are gonna go to. In Phoenix primary, really long lines, in part due to vote center model, not completely thought thru what that change. Could contribute to long lines if haven\'92t planned it carefully enough, if they have enough it could be great. I think more and more states and counties will look at this model because they can save $$ on election costs bc fewer polling places, more convenient for voters, can go to any one of them. Vote center idea is here to stay for a while takes careful.  \
\
Ballot design: there are now # of states that do this, still a handful of states that have a straight party mechanism, just check republican box at the top, then they know, you vote all republican in the ballot. Michigan still has this. That\'92s been a challenging feature for ballot design, for whatever reason that tends to confuse voters, esp if I want to vote an exception for 1 race, that can be very difficult, depending on what the rules are, what the instructions say. There are some researchers, straight party tend to be difficult for voters, esp for disadvantaged voters or low income. Pol scientists wrote book: testing out diff. \
1. Paul Herrnson \'97 Unv of Connecticut\
2. Michale Hammer \'97 Unv of Maryland\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Whitney \
What\'92s changed since you wrote \'93Better Ballots\'94?\
\
What are the worst problems in ballot design? \
What is the worst ballot you\'92ve seen? The best?\
How many people would you estimate fail to vote or vote as they intended because of bad design?\
\
What are the projects and jurisdictions trying to improve the situation?\
\
What are other design problems that crop up around elections that don\'92t have to do with ballots?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
- Forms like voter registration, vote-by-mail requests\
- Information about polling places, how to vote, accessibility options, and voter registration status\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\
Zoom backwards\
2000 baby, after that i needed up on voting systems standards. we kept having to separate ballot design, from voting systems. \
\
citing systems management tools tell you want you can do with the design, if they only put capital letters, if they don\'92t let you, when \
work on better instructions for ballots, \
none of these voting machines could do what were best practices. \
like being able to use upper/lower case, being able to put instructions anywhere, proper letter spacing. \
\
real eye opener. \
we can tall about what the machine has to do\
if a machine can\'92t display whats meaning fun, no good\
making sure the systems we use can in fact be helpful without biasing\
then we have to have election officials who can design a good ballot, and legislators who can design a good ballot. \
complicated problems, \
can the fed gov tell you you have to use sans-serif? \
now we have research, filling in the research,d we know that sans-serif is better, better for people who don\'92t read english as first languages, easier for people with reading disabilities, \
been thinking about, why do we feel so strongly about it, research about it \
\
just an area where not a lot of research, all about exceptions, \
suddenly there are 34 candidates for senate, how do you know what to do? \
Palm beach in 2000 was the right of untended effect, made text bigger, didn\'92t think about what happened . \
\
there\'92s little that turned around, but there are things that we didn\'92t think would matter mattered. \
Peter Design better elections, complete eye opener. All about data. \
Brennan did, brought together legal rights view, a political science quantitative view, where can we tell that something went wrong in an election, overrates, over votes, lets see if we can analyze the problem \
\
splitting a contest across 2 columns is just deadly. \
overtime we\'92ve seen it done its produced overrates, absolute mistakes that invalidate the vote in that contest\
\
3rd time, that\'92s a rule \
\
the eye pen small things have huge impacts partly because we all think we know how elections work, \
law of large numbers, little mistakes amplify. \
\
sunup \
\
look at patterns of over voting, looking at how oeopel overbooked around new york, suddenly, overlaying it on a map \'97 this matches the socioeconomic districts, \
errors people making on ballots that related to education, civic literacy, all is that heady soup of socioeconomic status \
if you don\'92t know the diff b/w state senator and us senators, \
\
overrates undervotes, jargon, \
\
pair of people for president, pair of people for gvernemr, vote for 1 content, vote for N contents, yes/no contests, should the vote be retained, we ask people to do a lit ofdiff things in compresses the period, \
\
vote for 1 district 2. voting for 2!\
mechanics can trip them up, if you\'92re a bank or doctors office you \
\
small tweaks \
attempt to take all the stuff we know and boil it down to small and actionable, we\'92ve hit every state. and they are having an impact, \
use lowercase letters !!\
when you take little things add up, big enough type is a huge thing!\
type size too small, can\'92t read instructions \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 ****we skip over instructions anyway, we do it worse when we can\'92t see them. 
\b0 \
\
put instructions on the place immediately write at the end of the last thing on that page\
instructional illustrations\
\'93fill in the oval completely,\'94 is a lot of words, but image. \
\
don\'92t use photographs\
y first thought, photos gonna be bad, reinforce bias issues, that they are not gong to be printable, party symbols, so degraded are a blob of mush . \
\
but, started noticing that road signs started to have pictures on them. \
Black woman running for state office in maryland\
showing her community that she is black?\
what are they showing?\
\
the last 3 years focusing on voter guides, office guide. Universally, people say, why would a candidate not put a picture in here?? Shorthand for I like their face, \
some places where photographs, Democracy Now does video guides, they contract with local TV/commucations, so that everyones video is shot the same way. \
\
\
Humanizes people, candidates. \
Voters said, I like knowing there is an actual person running this elections. \
\
Voter bill of rights. \
Can vote if you;re waiting in line when the polls closed. \
All this info is there, kind of info \
we need this, this is our rights, put it as the bag of the book, right behind the table of contents. \
Discovered that they could;dat actually read it, confusing,g CA passed a law to enable sec of state to update the text to be easier to read. \
\
Politician story, low literacy center in Berkely, reads slowly to this page, says, I think this says I can vote again. He was registered on the spot. It\'92s easy to say its not a big deal\
4 of them had tried and failed to vote.\
\
Though they had to have little card to vote. \
If those are the stories we know about outisdethe voting booth\
Michigan, only supposed to vote in 1 primary, if you vote in both primaries your vote is invalidated. \
Discussion, 3 people, I\'92ve been voting both sides for years!\
Educated readers. \
How many other things don\'92t we know.\
Confused voters., not stupid. \
\
Sometimes those numbers get big enough to cuount. Even if they don\'92t \
People think that they voice doesn\'92t actually count, if you think that, can take the jump to my vote isn\'92t counted\
\

\b ****when we design things in a way that doesn\'92t work for all voters, we degrade the quality of democracy\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 its not that making a gorgeous ballot would fix the problem, it might help push the ball of the hill \
Lots of little things, \
when you discover \
you do the second most \
you know what kind of outreach and voter adds you need to do. \
if you don\'92t know problems you don\'92t find out until after the election\
\
the combination of things we know as problems,tell us \
stop gap what can i do today? \
LA knows its machines are no good, in the meantime, they have a small format page, can only fit 18 on a page \
when we did text of 2 columns, we were getting 1/3 people errors, wow 66% errors. what did you try today? people were trying things, wedge it in, back is tall enough. \
if they didn\'92t pu the e\'94US Senate Candidates\'94 they could help reduce that number. Could at least bring it down from the stratosphere. \
\
Working on those numbers right now, 58 diff designs. Each has to make up own ballot. which strategies di they try, if it is 2 column, is there a way to box it?\
\
Best practices in paper ballot EAC\'92s Best Practices Ballots, still the gold standard, created by a AIGA\
Drew Davies from OX design. Tweak that work. \
Low literacy. Doesn\'92t mean you absorb words well through reading. Anywhere Ballot, low literacy pop in Baltimore. \'93Review your choices\'94 \
\'93Review your votes\'94 problem went away. Some of this is 4 plain language experts on that project. \
\
Los Angeles, VSAP, beginning of there punchcard systems turned into ink dot system, largest jurisdiction in the country, 5 mill voters, 10 languages. \
Ended up setting out on a process to design their own. We did work with them, anybody who wanted to could test ideas, worked with IDEO. Now creating an RFP to build it. Publicly known design. Something created owned by the county. If that works, we\'92re likely ti see counties in CA on that bus. \
\
Lovely design work, poor rich, disabilities, model for what a public process. \
Dean Logan, head of this inspiration. He is what the flute of election officials looks like we are in good shape. \
Smithsonian At the Cooper Hewitt. \
Press opening Thursday. \
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Dana Chisnell
\b0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 What are the worst problems in ballot design? \
What is the worst ballot you\'92ve seen? The best?\
\
What are the projects and jurisdictions trying to improve the situation?\
\
What are other design problems that crop up around elections that don\'92t have to do with ballots?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
- Forms like voter registration, vote-by-mail requests\
- Information about polling places, how to vote, accessibility options, and voter registration status\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
Wha\'92s something that\'92s often overlooked when talking about ballot design?\
\
\
\
2000, where butterfly ballot , stared to see news reports, leaving the pools saying i am not sure i voted for who. \
Wonder who actually design ballots, up til then i had been user experience. \
wonder what they are ding in election administration\
set on on a quest to understand how elections are done from the inside. \
inspired to look at this stuff, \
after that series of small volunteer projects and efforts, gradually, few people know i was interested, went from there. \
\
good thing about that thing happened in 200, law was 2002, hAVP, 1.3 billion dollars for new voting machines\
did not solve the problem, \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 any tine you introduce new technology, you introduce new design problems\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
Larry Norton \
\
In the meantime, we;ve seen some juicy ballot design issues play out, some small some big, biggest ones have generated recounts,\
For the presidential election there will ne the classic things, haven\'92t dated to see the ballots that will be issued, 45 days before elections days, have to start sending out ballots to miiatrya nd overseas ballots, \
but we see things repeat themselves \
\
known problem space, \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 classic one is splitting contests between 2 columns, 
\b0 the most commonly used ballot design layout is printed optical scan w 3 columns, not uncommon to see contests across 2 columns. happened in ohio in 2012, in presidential election & will happen again somewhere, because it does. \
\
more common, subtle ones: \
type is too small or 
\b place where you mark the ballot isn\'92t clear\
optical scan ballots, where the bubble is is very light, low vision may miss where the spot is. if scanners are very sensitive may not be counted
\b0 \
\
\
come with voting by mail \'85 lots of jurisdiction increasing voter by mail, everyone expects long ,lines, nothing wrong w that , but we know that people by mail make more mistakes than people who vote in polling place. \
votes may be lost, they made a mistake that they can\'92t correct, because in the wrong place in wrong time. \
\
should be able to solve this problems by design. \
not an easy thing to correct, \
\
minnesota worked on this after 2010 recount in which Al Franken was eventually elected as senate, most ballots challenged in recount were voter by mail\
rediesng the instructions and packets that people got, that turned out to be very successful, \
the #s of lost votes went down considerably. \
did the reddens by doing user testing, out to public library on a St Paul on a saturday, made some changes based on data and then tested that version again. came out with a packet that is visually appealing, not the actual ballot itself. Partly because they didn\'92t need to change the ballot itself. They get close to best practice. \
A thing they do in Minneapolis/ ranked choice voting for municipal offices like mayor. Right next to Vote for N contest, more than 1, and this is a little hotspot.\
I am concerned about. \
\

\b Care about but I\'92ve not had a chance to study it \'85 there are lots of different modes of voting on diff ballots. Cram it all together. 
\b0 \
If you\'92re in CA or Minnn, you will not to just res, vice res, probably a  state, senator, going to US senate, also state senator, or legislator, and then we get to other state content like attorney general, a local contests like district supervisor and in SF and Alameda county those all elected by ranked choice, but also commissions where you can vote 2-5 people. \
Judges to be retained or not and measures and propositions, \
put all that stuff together and very hard for oeple to change modes and figure out on the fly \
One way voting by mail is helpful, not rushed, \
but there you are by yourself. \
\

\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 Pockets everywhere, state of WA and Oregon, also worked very hard to embrace best practice design and doing usability testing, set the standards, everybody is going a little better job on elections \
some mistake happens, \
best practice ideally put the instructions on the top of the left hand column, not put anything underneath that.\
Ballot design software they don\'92t like white space, they like to cram as much in as possible, and election officlsl want to put as much as possible on paper cuz cost $$, \
favorites story, natural experiments that play out, \
2008 pr\'e8s election in Sarasota, gone from electronic touchscreen to paper optical scan system and the election official there been thru a lot, so she asked us if we could help her out, conduct usability testing, all of participants had voted in recent primary, expect all to get right, more than 1/2 had to be prompted to turn the ballot over. \
So the remedy was to put instruction right hand column, \'93TURN ballot over\'94 when they did that, far fewer lost votes in Sarasota compared to 14 other counties. As measured by whether people voted for the constitutional ballot\
\
We may see things like that here. there\'92s a lot at stake, there are very tough deadlines to make with a lot of moving parts, and because voters rarely know everything that\'92s going to be ballots. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 The instructions are uniformly horrible!
\b0 \
Big thing, if you look at the instructions on 90% of ballots they were written for some system put in place in 19th century, no one\'92s really looked at them to make sure that people actually understand them, \
\
1 reason we have a secret ballot\'85tradition, is because at the beginning of industrial revolution bosses union bosses would pressure workers to vote a particle way. They would leave a distinctive mark on the ballot, then they union boss would be able to see that his workers the way they wanted. \
Now there are instructions that say \'93IF YOU DEFACE OR OTHERWISE MARK BALLOT, GO TO JAIL\'94 and no one understands what this says. \
Things like that stuck in election code, would have to go do a legislative review, \
There is a lot of stuff in election code, practically everywhere that grossly over specifies what the ballot should look like. Grid, type size, font, etc. \
\
In 2010 when NY moved over, instructions that were in election code were completely different. \
Encoded in election law. Would be nice to see a little backing off, esp as technology changes, changing rapidly now. \
\
NY still requires party symbols, none of the symbols are meaningful to any human beings, they are not, whatever reasons for those being there have been lost. \
\
Other kinds of preposterous things. there are some cray  procedural. \
Absentee ballot in Minn there is a witness. \
\
The best sources on this are discussion ho ballot design can effect the outcome of elections\
2 reports Brennan Center \
Better Ballots, 2nd, Better Design Better Elections, \
\
13 very specific examples of situations where the margin of victory was smaller than lost votes. Common theme in each of those situations, ballot design problems, seems likely that people\'92s votes were lost. \
\
Eric Karen historian, social scientist, podcast 99% Invisible butterfly effect. Eric has good points. \
\
\
\
\
Drew Davies\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 What are the worst problems in ballot design? \
What is the worst ballot you\'92ve seen? The best?\
\
What are the projects and jurisdictions trying to improve the situation?\
\
What are other design problems that crop up around elections that don\'92t have to do with ballots?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
- Forms like voter registration, vote-by-mail requests\
- Information about polling places, how to vote, accessibility options, and voter registration status\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
Wha\'92s something that\'92s often overlooked when talking about ballot design?\
\
\
Oxide design, branding and design shop, turn 15 years. Right about 10 years ago, we\'92d be in the business of info design, forms, data visualization, opportunity to join team to build national best practice design standard, the federal guidelines best practices document, election assistance \
hired the AIGA to build the best practices for ballot design. \
One of the last men standing endeavor, fairly long process, new field where none of us had any subject matter expertise, long slog, oxide was there are end of the process, end of the document. \
so we\'92ve been one of the national leaders in ballot and election design because gave us subject matter expertise, we went out advocating for design standards, building the field guides, etc. \
\
We\'92ve been, made us a curious burden, half is more traditional branding and other half is working on election and ballot design problems. \
\
What we\'92ve done is, Oxide serves as visual design arm for efforts of Center for Civic Design. Working through usability tests. To get to continue the evolution towards more usable more accurate. \
More often, it\'92s counties of jurisdictions reaching out to us. In a spot where they are ready to make improvements, difficult world being an official, safer if you don\'92t mess around with stuff, even if you know it could be better, approach very thoughtfully. Don\'92t think too many people receptive to someone showing up and saying hey you should fix your ballot. \
\
It\'92s a sort of rogues gallery, Better Ballots, that\'92s, I can see how that caused people to think that they were voting right but not got it right.\
We approach these materials in holistic way, that instructional language, one of those things the legislators in states are writing instructional language or left to adminstaritve assistant a the last minute , not that they are intentionally sabotaging it, but there is skill involved in making it plain lunges. \
Amazing to me just who difficult it is to get through the instructions, to make people confident that they are going to vote the way they intended. \
\
Related to that \'97 how many design specifications are written into law by legislators who are not designers. \
This block of text has to be in capital letters, or bold and all capital, visual designers are not making those choices. Legislators, to any reflection on numerous studies that tell us lowercase is better. \
Amazing  how many design prescriptions are written into law by non-designers, the nav best of intentions, but gut assumption on these things when you\'92re not a design is not always. \
\
Literally prescribing out the pointing finger. \
\
Well absolutely, good news is more an more people are starting to take notice, \
Our shining star is Oregon, move to all by mail, they\'92re ballots and voter info materials have come a really long way, kinda the best sample of this we have going on. \
\
Douglass County, Omaha Nebraska, they\'92ve taken on large # of ballot practices, of their own volition, without leaning on us, great job implementing, \
like that example they really just took guidelines and figured out how to apply them. \
Didn\'92t have to rely on bringing in professionals. Our job has been to bring guides to people, expected to do ballot layout work, they are not expecting that to be part of their job, shift our rules to speak to people who didn\'92t go to RISD for 4 years, nor should expect. \
 \
I had sense that if you fixed the ballots you fix the problem, bt all of that initial voter information material is where we\'92ve really seen, we can get people more engaged, finding that skipping the ballot part, main questions ares till \'85 when is the election & where do i go to vote, how do i get registered? Concept of I need to be registered before i go vote isn\'92t that clear to people, no concept that that\'92s required in advance. I will also vote, wait till election day, most states you don\'92t get to register the day you votes, 4 weeks in advance, answering a lot of those initial voter Q\'92s has been one of our tasks, we\'92ve worked with lots of states, can make headway while we simultaneously work on ballots, get them that voter information. \
What you can expect to see when you get to the ballot. \
\
Doing a lot in CA, place may allow state and then each county require to send voter printed information guide to each voter prior to each election, in a place like that, seems a little archaic, it is a state where all those voters are getting the most info on what\'92s going on and how i make decisions, sliding scale for other states, post things on the website, go searching for info on ballot. Where is my polling place is something you get mailed in every state. \
\
Fact the states are responsible for own running of elections is what makes this field tougher to get a handle on, diff in every county. Isn\'92t solution where you can prescribe something at federal level. \
\
We could see more marked improvement all at once, federal standards on these things, but since we\'92re not just letting each state decide how to decimate information, we\'92re letting them decide 21 days early or what machine to vote, sweeping change t, lock in rules in what we vote on and schedule of things, we wouldn\'92t be able to use it very effectively anyways, you could barely send a mailer out to everyone in the US. The system is not inherently bad, would be easier to spread tested usability across the nation is more federal standards, but I\'92m sure there would. \
\
National scope\
\
Dean Logan. LA county, election official side, overseeing very progressive redesign.\
Nebraska Adam Morfeld, Nebraskans for Civic reform, focused on diff voting and ballot reform statewide both from voting rights to accessibility to potential even mandating improved ballots across the states. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Marcia Lausen \'a0\'a0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Also, I was wondering if you had a high res version of the images in your book for the November 2000 judicial retention ballot in Cook County? I\'92d love to be able to show the before/after with your redesign.\'a0\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
book came out in 2007. \
\
Are there plans for a new book?\
\
What would be the next book?\
\
\
Al happened in 2000, with Palm beach county ballot where the outcome of the presidential election might have been decided based on a bad ballot design. \
Ballot design were on the front page of every paper in the country, attention doesn\'92t get this very often, graphic design, or information design where the goal of a project is to make info very clear. \
I was in leadership of local chapter of AIGA, this was a time for advocacy for our profession, an opportunity not to be missed.\
\
Offering out expertise, our local election official was receptive, began work locally to make better examples. \
ballot design is only a small part of what goes on in the display of information and process. \
\
\
problems are almost always going to be the same: clear presentation of info\
because complicate an,\
provide guidelines for how to solve problems that will always be continuing, we\'92re not done and we\'92ll never be done because things always change. \
\
provided tools for election officials to use to create clear choices for voters, \
problems to be? we don\'92t know what they are\'85 \
we\'92ve accomplished something important, overarching guidelines and awareness. \
\
complicating to that issue is that election code was local\'85 in illonois proposed a ballot design, turned out out that election code dictated all caps. why and how do we change it. so we had to change the law to be able to use lowercase letters\
\
we proposed this background tone, that was also not allowed, ask for everything if you go to bat for changing election code. \
they are simple changes but they take time\
\
in NY, top down, language in legislation for election design. \
work it both ways. \
\
the need for training materials for poll workers and the clarity needed in there. They are paid little, do this on election day and a few days prior in their training, lot of processes and changes in process. \
Frustration who they encounter at polling place\
big workforce that needs to be trained, \
elections go on infrequently that you have to remember. the way they know how, but things may change. \
developing materials for poll workers, organizing information clear and less dense. \
\
administration of elections: collection of ballots, absentee, provisions, instructions to voters, that get mailed, that end up in the polling places, registration of voting. Involve election \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 ballots are where all the drama happens, but much much more. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 About clarity so not excitement about design in this work, we\'92re happy w significant\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 we\'92re not going to win design awards for ballot design\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
it\'92s much more subtle than that in this sort of work, deliver the basics of information design. \
applies across the board\
10 principles of ballot design. \
We always thought in terms of systems, not just certain ballots. \
\
everybody has good intentions here, people laying out this information they are not trained designers but they take great pride in what they\'92ve done. \
\
think about what\'92s most important, size you use, everything has \
\
doing this work, we have very receptive audiences, they love to hear what you have to say, they want to do their best, surprised by the determination to make things better, they do share best practices, we\'92d get better examples into the mix and things will improve. \
\
Drew Davies \'97 more in touch with whats going on. \
\
For me it was entirely pro bono effort, my studio and classwork.\
Design practice do work of all kinds. \
enthusiasm here\'92s our chance, and for my students. \
\
election commission\'85 \
there are designers out there who can help, resources for election officials. \
new exec director\'85 Design for Democracy, Julie\'85 she;s very excited about this work, staying active in this kind of area.alive and well. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}