{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10780\viewh9320\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 What other examples of bad design in healthcare?\
Other examples of unnecessary words?\
What are some good examples?\
Who else is covering this issue?\
\
\
\
Physician was on sabbatical, got interested in design & innovation. just profoundly effected by the imp of design. \
not something i knew about before i left, self-taught. lots of patient engagement, workshops, patient care giver voices and dieting and healthcare tools. professor, researcher, spent a lot of time rethinking healthcare through the lens of design. transformed the way i see the world. \
\
in healthcare not concept that design is even an issue. fascinating. before, my life/perspective on life. but now its clearly, horrible solution to a mistake that people continue to make over and over despite the fact that the sign is there. \
\
kids have food allergies, been using the epipen. \
that was when i was just getting back from sabbatical. \
\
personal experiencet trying to design better tools for my kids trying to manage food allergies. \
\
other piece around when we were away, the Auvi-Q came out that year, so much better. \
no do not touch the orange tip, i will poke me. \
\
interesting initial slides for talks at diabetes conferences. articifla pancreas, \
1992, can\'92t believe i was given a vial of insulin. \
\
EpiPen, letter was written bt Mylan to FDA, it was written to protest the approval of Teva\'92s generic product, **** wrote this letter, protesting categorization of the EpiPen, going for a generic. Interesting clearly did it because monopolize the market, but description of the design of this other pen, it\'92s true that its confusing\'85 3 steps to ither pen. 2 other Adrenaclick, also pens that are weirdly designed. \
\
Facisnating aside from Auvi-Q, bad design to not be delivering medication. The standard fright now is the EpiPEn, to get a generic you\'92d have to get the same, that\'92s considered the gold standard. Someone has to come in and do a new drug application, more efficacious. For there to be a generic, much tougher. \
\
Q: does generic have to be the same design as the EpiPen\
\
If you prescribe Adreenaclick, a pharmissits is not allowed to substitute an EpiPen. Milan made this argument about the FDA. \
\
we have these legacy systems. barrier to entry is so high, must have the resources to get through regulatory process. \
\
Blog: Prescribe Design. Lenny Nar  & Aaron at Well Talk\
\
Dennis Boyle, IDEO \'85. gives the tour, explains how they design the defibrillator. Turned it into, created 3 steps, fixate on 123 as they were trying to resuscitate someone. \
\
\
\
\
}